Create a logs@custom index template reference (#3593)
elastic/observability-docs: docs/en/observability/logs-index-template.asciidoc

[[logs-index-template]]
= Logs index template reference

[[custom-logs-index-template]]
== View index templates

Index templates are used to configure the backing indices of data streams as they are created.

> These index templates are composed of multiple component templates--reusable building blocks

Reviewer: Can we link to the Elasticsearch docs for component templates here for users that are interested in more details?

that configure index mappings, settings, and aliases.

The default Logs index template can be viewed in {kib}.
Navigate to **{stack-manage-app}** → **Index Management** → **Index Templates**, and search for `logs`.
Select any of the logs index templates to view their relevant component templates.

[discrete]
[custom-logs-template-edit]
=== Edit the {es} index template

> {es} has a built-in index template for the `logs-*-*` index pattern, which is composed of component templates including:

Reviewer 2: I would mention that this default index template is called just `logs`

* `logs@mappings`
* `logs@settings`
* `logs@custom`
* `ecs@mappings`

> You can use the `@custom` component template to customize your {es} indices. The `logs@custom` template is not installed by default, but you can create a template named `logs@custom` to override and extend default mappings or settings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use the `logs@custom` component template to customize your {es} indices. The `logs@custom` component template is not installed by default, but you can create a component template named `logs@custom` to override and extend default mappings or settings.
```

> You can use the `@custom` component template to customize your {es} indices. The `logs@custom` template is not installed by default, but you can create a template named `logs@custom` to override and extend default mappings or settings.

Reviewer 2: I currently get this error because logs@custom doesn't exist. I'm using this version of the stack `8.13.0-f56d9bd5-SNAPSHOT` released on 2024-02-05

```json
{
  "statusCode": 400,
  "error": "Bad Request",
  "message": "index_template [simulate_template_cjga1q24s0swusgjolwsba] invalid, cause [index template [simulate_template_cjga1q24s0swusgjolwsba] specifies component templates [logs@custom] that do not exist]",
  "attributes": {
    "error": {
      "root_cause": [
        {
          "type": "invalid_index_template_exception",
          "reason": "index_template [simulate_template_cjga1q24s0swusgjolwsba] invalid, cause [index template [simulate_template_cjga1q24s0swusgjolwsba] specifies component templates [logs@custom] that do not exist]"
        }
      ],
      "type": "invalid_index_template_exception",
      "reason": "index_template [simulate_template_cjga1q24s0swusgjolwsba] invalid, cause [index template [simulate_template_cjga1q24s0swusgjolwsba] specifies component templates [logs@custom] that do not exist]"
    }
  }
}
```

Reviewer 3: I've encountered this at some point (see [thread](https://elastic.slack.com/archives/CNMNXV4RG/p1707391367379259
)) but couldn't replicate it today after testing several versions (didn't test snapshots)

Reviewer 2: @gbamparop I could use someone else trying the latest snapshot to see if it is just me or we need to open a bug about this.

Reviewer 2: @gbamparop I have added some more info to this [thread](https://elastic.slack.com/archives/CNMNXV4RG/p1708015894378669?thread_ts=1707391367.379259&cid=CNMNXV4RG) so that someone else can replicate it.

Open {kib} and navigate to **{stack-manage-app}** → **Index Management** → **Component Templates**.

. Click *Create component template*.
. Name the component template logs@custom.

> . Add any custom metadata, index settings, or mappings.

Reviewer: After adding the template, all indices that have it, a rollover needs to be triggered to make the changes available.

[discrete]
[[custom-logs-template-default-field]]
=== Set the `default_field` using the custom template

> The `logs-*-*` index template uses `default_field: [*]` meaning queries without specified fields will search across all fields.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `logs` index template uses `default_field: [*]` meaning queries without specified fields will search across all fields.
```

`logs-*-*` is the index pattern referenced by the index template `logs`

You can update the `default_field` to  search in the `message` field instead of all fields using the `logs@custom` component template.

> Either create the `logs@custom` template as detailed in the previous section, or edit the existing one to include the following in the *Index settings*:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Either create the `logs@custom` component template as detailed in the previous section, or add the following code in the *Index settings* of the index template `logs`:
```

I don't think we should suggest to edit the index template `logs` to add this default_field. I would scrap anything after `as detailed in the previous section`

. Open {kib} and navigate to **{stack-manage-app}** → **Index Management** → **Component Templates**.
. Click *Create component template*.
. Name the component template logs@custom.
. Add any custom metadata, index settings, or mappings.

Changes to component templates are not applied retroactively to existing indices. For changes to take effect, create a new write index for impacted data streams by triggering a rollover. Do this using the {es} {ref}/indices-rollover-index.html[Rollover API]. For example, to roll over the `logs-generic-default` data stream, run:

[source,console]
----
POST /logs-generic-default/_rollover/
----

[discrete]
[[custom-logs-template-default-field]]
=== Set the `default_field` using the custom template

The `logs` index template uses `default_field: [*]` meaning queries without specified fields will search across all fields.
You can update the `default_field` to  search in the `message` field instead of all fields using the `logs@custom` component template.

> Either create the `logs@custom` component template as outlined in the previous section, or add the following code to the *Index settings* of the `logs` index template:

Reviewer 2: @ruflin, what do you think about this sentence?

Personally, I wouldn't suggest fiddling with the `logs` index template but only changing the custom component template. 

Thoughts? @gbamparop

Reviewer 2: ok. sorry it wasn't 100% clear. 

I would rephrase as "If you don't already have a logs@custom component template you can create it manually. Once you have it, you can add the following to the settings section"

Author: Thanks for pointing it out. I updated it to be clear and add steps for updating the template. I guess because of the way the search works, you can't search for anything using the "@" symbol? or it throws the error:
![image](https://github.com/elastic/observability-docs/assets/114418652/8da8cbe1-244e-431f-8ab7-13030466e059)

Not sure if there's an underlying reason for this, but it does make it pretty difficult to find any custom templates.

Reviewer: That sounds like a bug especially as we use it in our names. Has anyone reported this? If not, lets do it.
